Serial communication is
sending one bit at a time.
That's essentially what it means.
Now, in this context,
and often you'll see the
term serial communication
used this way,
serial means UART communication.
UART is a specific
serial protocol
that we've talked about.
We're going to talk about
more too in the class,
but it's a specific
serial protocol.
The term serial really is
more broad than just UART,
but it is often used
interchangeably.
Specifically, in the
Arduino context,
we're going to use this
serial communication library.
It's called serial, but it is
a UART communication library.
So, you should be aware of that.
So, we're using UART protocol
over a USB cable.
UART protocol needs
say three wires.
One transmit, one receive,
and then another one
for the common ground.
There are other wires you
could use, but those are minimum.
It sends one bit at a time in
one direction or the other,
or actually, it can send
both directions at the same time.
So, it's got two different wires.
But you need those wires.
So, you can connect to
a microcontroller or
an integrated circuit
and communicate just via wires,
but it is most common in
bigger systems to use
the USB cable itself.
So, from the Arduino to
the laptop when they want to
communicate with each other,
they communicate
over the USB cable.
When you're using
the serial library,
they are communicating using
the UART protocol
over the USB cable.
But it wasn't
originally that way.
There was another cable, RS-232,
that was originally made
specifically for this protocol,
but that's not installed
in machines anymore.
So, now people just do it
commonly over the USB cable.
So, the way you start serial
communication in Arduino
is you have to call
this initialization function
Serial.begin.
Typically, you put that
initialization function inside
your setup because you only want
it to be executed one time,
you don't want it to
be executed in a loop.
Now, Serial.begin it can
take one or two arguments.
If it's one argument,
that argument is
the speed and if
it's two arguments,
then the first argument is
the speed and the second
is the configuration.
Now, the speed is the baud rate.
That means the bits per
second that you're
sending or the number of
transitions per second
on the line which is
essentially the bits per
second that you're sending.
These are not all data bits node.
So, even if you have
a high baud rate,
remember that the data rate is a
little bit less than that
because there's an overhead,
there is the stop bit
and a parody bit and
other things that
we'll talk about.
But baud rate is the number
of bits per second.
There are certain baud rates
that are common in serial.
You can use anyone you want.
There's certain
common baud rates,
like 9,600 baud is
a common baud rate.
Now, note that the
faster the baud rate the faster
the data transmission.
So that sounds good. You want
to transmit as fast as you can.
Ninety-six hundred baud
is pretty slow.
Ninety-six hundred bits
per second is pretty slow.
But there's a limit to
this because there's
a synchronization that goes on
between the two
communicating parties.
They have to be timed in sync
and the synchronization
fails once
the baud rate gets too high.
They don't synchronize well.
Sometimes in practice when making
an IoT device or
analyzing a device,
when communicating
with the device
at a particular baud rate,
often just slowing down the
baud rate will make it work.
So, maybe at a high
baud rate it doesn't
work because they're
not synchronizing well,
but if I just slow it down,
then they synchronize fine
and everything's okay.
The synchronization
goes wrong because of
noise errors in the wires
and stuff like that,
a long wire, stuff like
this will cause problems.
So, just slowing down the
baud rate is often helpful.
So, speed is first argument.
You have to give that argument.
The other argument
is a configuration.
So, this sets the properties
of the communication,
basically the bits
that you're sending.
How many data bits,
how many parity bit,
or are you sending
a parity bit rather,
how many stop bits and so on.
So, there are a set of
constants that are defined
for that in the Arduino library.
So, one thing you could call a
Serial.begin 9,600 that's a
common and that says okay
centered at 9,600 baud rate.
Now, you can also try
this where you get
the second argument.
The second argument is a
constant that is associated
with some certain configuration.
So, that Serial 8N1 that means,
and you just have
to look this up,
but what that means
is eight data bits,
no parody, one-stop bit.
Typically, we're not going
to use a second argument.
Not in this class because we're
going to use the default.
That's actually the default.
We're going to use
a default configuration
and that's fine for us.
But you can change that if you
wanted to for
any particular reason.
Okay. So, again,
with Arduino Serial
communication with the library,
there are several different
functions that you can call.
Now, the first
function we already
talked about is Serial.begin.
You call that in
the setup one time.
But, there are other functions
you can call to send data
from the Arduino to
the other device,
in this case, to the laptop
let's say over the USB cable.
Serial.print is a very
common function to call.
Serial.print does basically
what you would think.
It sends a string and it
sends it to the laptop.
Let's say it's a laptop,
it sends it to
the laptop over the USB cable.
Now, what happens when
it arrives there is that
the Arduino sending via serial
there has to be
a receiving program running on
the laptop to receive
the serial communication.
Now, typically what
we're going to do
is if you look at
the Arduino IDE,
there's a button on there
called, it's serial monitor.
You click on that. It
opens up a window.
The window we see here. It opens
up a window and it's blank.
Then when the Arduino
is running and when it
calls Serial.print say hello,
that hello is sent over
the USB cable to
the serial monitor
running on the laptop and then
that whatever text it was
appears in the monitor.
So, that's what
we're seeing here.
Now, notice that it's
just saying hello,
hello, hello, hello
over and over.
That's because, I'm not
sure on the whole program,
but that's because I
put the Serial.print
hello inside the loop function
in the Arduino sketch and
so it just loops and does
it over and over and over.
So, that's what we
would expect to see.
Then notice there's no carriage
return after the hello.
It's just hello, hello
strung out after each other.
If I did Serial.print line ln,
it will put a carriage
return after one
and then each one would
be on a different line,
but this why I chose to do.
So, this is the general idea.
Now, something there
about UART is that,
basically UART is a protocol to
send bytes, to send eight bits.
These eight bits of data can be
just raw data, can
represent anything.
Now, in this case though
with Serial.print,
we're generally representing
strings, printable strings.
Serial.print "hello" is
a string, five characters.
So, there are five
characters that we need to
send via UART over to the laptop.
So, the thing is these,
remember that we're sending bits,
like sequences of bits, sending
one bit at a time,
zeros and ones.
So each one of
these five characters
has to be represented as
a sequence of zeros and ones
in order to be sent via UART.
The most common representation
for small things like this
is called ASCII code, A-S-C-I-I.
So, if you google this,
you'll find the ASCII code table.
It's a big table and it's
an eight-bit
representation of most of
the characters that there is
an English that you want to
represent on the screen.
So, all the characters on
your keyboard plus some more,
each one of them is
associated with a number,
an ASCII code number.
So, for instance, I happen
to remember off the top
my head a capital A
is a 41 in ASCII.
That's the only one I remember.
But each one of this character is
associated with a number
in a big table.
This number is an
eight-bit number.
So, what happens is when
you'd call Serial.print,
it says okay I've
got five characters.
It says H that is say it's 51.
It picks a 51, represent it as
an eight-bit number and sends
that eight bits to the laptop,
to the serial monitor.
The serial monitor receives
that eight bits and says,
this eight bits
must be ASCII code.
It looks up that ASCII code
number inside the table,
says that's the letter H and it
prints an H on the screen.
That's how the data is sent
and represented on the screen.
So, an ASCII code is
just an eight-bit code for
every character that
you want to display.
Though that's what's actually
being sent over the wires,
this ASCII code representation.
Now, I'm talking about ASCII.
That's an eight-bit
code and that's
limited because if you
only got eight-bit code,
you can only represent
256 characters max.
Now, in English that's fine.
But especially when you get
to like Chinese or something,
you got a lot of characters
and 256 will not cut it.
So, you need more.
Not just Chinese either,
but there are other scripts,
but Chinese particularly
is all character-based.
You got a lot of characters.
Plus there are other characters
besides letters,
periods, and all kinds
of weird characters
that you might want to
represent on the screen.
So, 256 is not really enough.
So, now people use
Unicode, 16-bit character
representation.
But for now, we'll
talk about ASCII.
So, this is the idea.
Each one of these characters
is represented as
an eight-bit number
out of an ASCII table,
you can google it and look
at the table if you want to.
Those eight bits are
transmitted and then they're
printed on the screen
at the receiving end.
They re-represented as
the original character
they represented and
that's put on the screen.
Now, that's what
Serial.print does.
Now, instead of
using Serial.print,
you might want to
use Serial.write.
Now, Serial.write it also
sends bytes to the screen,
but it sends one bite at a time.
So, you remember what
that Serial.print hello,
you had in quotes as
string H-E-L-L-O so it
send five characters
which means five bytes.
In this case, Serial.write,
you just give it one argument
which is a number.
That number it represents
that as a byte.
So, like in this case,
Serial.write 42.
It represents that as
a number in binary,
a sequence of bits and
binary, eight bits.
It sends those eight bits
to the serial monitor.
Now, the serial monitor,
it receives all the bits and
again it does what it
did with serial print.
It looks at those eight bits
and says okay what
ASCII character does
this represent?
And the ASCII character
is what gets printed
on the screen.
So, notice even though you're
doing Serial.write 42,
42 is not appearing on
screen because what's
happening is on
the receiving end
isn't taken that from
42 and interpreting that
as an ASCII character
and saying well,
which character is
represented by the number 42?
It happens that it's an
asterisk in this case.
So, that's why we got asterisk
appearing all down the screen.
So, that's what
Serial.write does.
It sends a raw byte.
You just give it the number,
it interprets it as eight-bit
number and it sends that
and it gets represented
in ASCII at
the serial monitor because
that's what serial monitor does.